README.md, before:

# 🏠 Mortgage Simulation Frontend

A modern React TypeScript application for simulating mortgage payments, savings growth, and net worth over time. This frontend connects to the [Mortgage Simulation API](https://api.mortgasim.com/) to provide comprehensive financial projections.

## ✨ Features

- **Interactive Form**: Easy-to-use form for entering mortgage and savings parameters
- **Real-time Charts**: Beautiful Chart.js visualizations showing:
  - Balance evolution (mortgage balance, savings balance, net worth)
  - Monthly payment breakdown (payments, interest, principal)
- **Summary Statistics**: Key metrics including final balances, minimum savings, and payoff dates
- **Sample Data**: Load sample scenarios for quick testing
- **CSV Export**: Download simulation results for further analysis
- **API Health Monitoring**: Real-time status of the backend API
- **Responsive Design**: Works perfectly on desktop and mobile devices

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Prerequisites

- Node.js 18+ 
- npm or yarn

### Installation

1. **Clone the repository**
   ```bash
   git clone <repository-url>
   cd mortgasimfront
   ```

2. **Install dependencies**
   ```bash
   npm install
   ```

3. **Configure environment variables**
   
   Copy the example environment file and configure it:
   ```bash
   cp env.example .env
   ```
   
   Update `.env` with your settings:
   ```env
   # For local development with API running on localhost:8000
   VITE_ENV=development
   
   # For production with the hosted API
   VITE_ENV=production
   ```

4. **Start the development server**
   ```bash
   npm run dev
   ```

5. **Open your browser**
   
   Navigate to `http://localhost:5173` to view the application.

## 🔧 Configuration

### Environment Variables

The application automatically switches between development and production API endpoints:

- **Development**: `http://127.0.0.1:8000` (local API server)
- **Production**: `https://api.mortgasim.com/` (hosted API)

### API Endpoints Used

- `GET /` - Health check
- `POST /simulate` - Run mortgage simulation
- `GET /simulate/sample` - Get sample request data
- `POST /simulate/csv` - Export results as CSV

## 📊 How to Use

### 1. **Fill in Mortgage Details**
- Mortgage amount (£)
- Term in years (max 40)
- Fixed rate percentage
- Fixed term in months
- Variable rate after fixed period
- Optional: Maximum payment after fixed period

### 2. **Configure Savings Parameters**
- Initial savings balance
- Monthly contribution amount
- Savings interest rate

### 3. **Set Simulation Parameters**
- Typical monthly payment
- Property value
- Years to show after mortgage payoff
- Optional: Overpayment schedule

### 4. **Run Simulation**
Click "Run Simulation" to see:
- Month-by-month projections
- Interactive charts
- Summary statistics
- Warnings and recommendations

### 5. **Export Results**
Click "Export CSV" to download detailed results for Excel analysis.

## 🎯 Overpayment Format

Overpayments should be entered in the format: `month:amount,month:amount`

Examples:
- `18:20000` - £20,000 overpayment in month 18
- `18:20000,24:15000` - £20,000 in month 18 and £15,000 in month 24
- `12:5000,24:5000,36:5000` - £5,000 every 12 months

## 🛠️ Development

### Available Scripts

- `npm run dev` - Start development server
- `npm run build` - Build for production
- `npm run preview` - Preview production build
- `npm run lint` - Run ESLint
- `npm run lint:fix` - Fix ESLint issues
- `npm run format` - Format code with Prettier
- `npm run type-check` - Run TypeScript type checking

### Tech Stack

- **React 19** - UI framework
- **TypeScript** - Type safety
- **Vite** - Build tool and dev server
- **Tailwind CSS** - Styling
- **Chart.js + react-chartjs-2** - Data visualization
- **React Hook Form + Zod** - Form handling and validation
- **React Query** - API state management
- **Axios** - HTTP client

### Project Structure

```
src/
├── components/          # Reusable UI components
│   ├── MortgageForm.tsx    # Main simulation form
│   ├── MortgageCharts.tsx  # Chart visualizations
│   └── Button.tsx          # Button component
├── pages/              # Page components
│   └── MortgageSimulation.tsx # Main simulation page
├── services/           # API services
│   └── mortgageApi.ts     # Mortgage API client
├── types/              # TypeScript type definitions
│   └── mortgage.ts        # API response types
├── utils/              # Utility functions
│   └── validation.ts      # Form validation schemas
└── main.tsx           # Application entry point
```

## 🌐 API Documentation

The application connects to the Mortgage Simulation API. For detailed API documentation, see the OpenAPI specification in `mortgagesim.json`.

Key features of the API:
- Comprehensive mortgage and savings simulation
- Fixed-rate period followed by variable rate
- Overpayment handling with savings deduction
- Savings growth with interest compounding
- Payment constraints and feasibility checks
- Net worth calculation including property value

## 🚀 Deployment

### Vercel (Recommended)

This project is optimized for Vercel deployment with the included `vercel.json` configuration.

#### Deploy to Vercel:

1. **Option 1: Connect GitHub Repository**
   - Push your code to GitHub
   - Go to [vercel.com](https://vercel.com)
   - Click "New Project" and import your GitHub repository
   - Vercel will automatically detect the Vite framework and configure the build

2. **Option 2: Deploy via CLI**
   ```bash
   # Install Vercel CLI
   npm i -g vercel
   
   # Deploy
   vercel
   
   # For production deployment
   vercel --prod
   ```

#### Environment Variables
If you need to override the API URL, you can set:
- `VITE_ENV=production` (automatically set by vercel.json)
- `VITE_API_URL=https://your-custom-api.com` (optional override)

### Other Platforms

For other deployment platforms, build the project and serve the `dist` folder:

```bash
npm run build
# Serve the 'dist' directory as a static site
```

## 🤝 Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add some amazing feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

## 📝 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the LICENSE file for details.

---

**Built with ❤️ using React + TypeScript + Vite**

Commit message:

Update SEO and branding across the application to reflect the new focus on comprehensive mortgage, savings, and overpayment simulation. Enhanced meta tags, README, and website description for improved clarity and search optimization. Updated UI text in MortgageSimulation component for consistency with new branding.

README.md, after:

# 🏠 Mortgage, Savings & Overpayment Simulator Frontend

A modern React TypeScript application for comprehensive mortgage, savings and overpayment simulation. This frontend connects to the [Mortgage Simulation API](https://api.mortgasim.com/) to provide detailed financial projections and modeling capabilities.

## ✨ Features

- **Comprehensive Financial Modeling**: Complete mortgage, savings, and overpayment simulation
- **Interactive Form**: Easy-to-use form for entering mortgage, savings, and overpayment parameters  
- **Overpayment Strategies**: Model different overpayment scenarios and timing
- **Real-time Charts**: Beautiful Chart.js visualizations showing:
  - Balance evolution (mortgage balance, savings balance, net worth)
  - Monthly payment breakdown (payments, interest, principal)
  - Impact of overpayments on payoff timeline
- **Summary Statistics**: Key metrics including final balances, minimum savings, payoff dates, and overpayment benefits
- **Sample Data**: Load sample scenarios for quick testing
- **CSV Export**: Download detailed simulation results for further analysis
- **API Health Monitoring**: Real-time status of the backend API
- **Responsive Design**: Works perfectly on desktop and mobile devices

## 🚀 Quick Start

### Prerequisites

- Node.js 18+ 
- npm or yarn

### Installation

1. **Clone the repository**
   ```bash
   git clone <repository-url>
   cd mortgasimfront
   ```

2. **Install dependencies**
   ```bash
   npm install
   ```

3. **Configure environment variables**
   
   Copy the example environment file and configure it:
   ```bash
   cp env.example .env
   ```
   
   Update `.env` with your settings:
   ```env
   # For local development with API running on localhost:8000
   VITE_ENV=development
   
   # For production with the hosted API
   VITE_ENV=production
   ```

4. **Start the development server**
   ```bash
   npm run dev
   ```

5. **Open your browser**
   
   Navigate to `http://localhost:5173` to view the application.

## 🔧 Configuration

### Environment Variables

The application automatically switches between development and production API endpoints:

- **Development**: `http://127.0.0.1:8000` (local API server)
- **Production**: `https://api.mortgasim.com/` (hosted API)

### API Endpoints Used

- `GET /` - Health check
- `POST /simulate` - Run mortgage simulation
- `GET /simulate/sample` - Get sample request data
- `POST /simulate/csv` - Export results as CSV

## 📊 How to Use

### 1. **Fill in Mortgage Details**
- Mortgage amount (£)
- Term in years (max 40)
- Fixed rate percentage
- Fixed term in months
- Variable rate after fixed period
- Optional: Maximum payment after fixed period

### 2. **Configure Savings Parameters**
- Initial savings balance
- Monthly contribution amount
- Savings interest rate

### 3. **Set Simulation Parameters**
- Typical monthly payment
- Property value
- Years to show after mortgage payoff
- Optional: Overpayment schedule

### 4. **Run Simulation**
Click "Run Simulation" to see:
- Month-by-month projections
- Interactive charts
- Summary statistics
- Warnings and recommendations

### 5. **Export Results**
Click "Export CSV" to download detailed results for Excel analysis.

## 🎯 Overpayment Format

Overpayments should be entered in the format: `month:amount,month:amount`

Examples:
- `18:20000` - £20,000 overpayment in month 18
- `18:20000,24:15000` - £20,000 in month 18 and £15,000 in month 24
- `12:5000,24:5000,36:5000` - £5,000 every 12 months

## 🛠️ Development

### Available Scripts

- `npm run dev` - Start development server
- `npm run build` - Build for production
- `npm run preview` - Preview production build
- `npm run lint` - Run ESLint
- `npm run lint:fix` - Fix ESLint issues
- `npm run format` - Format code with Prettier
- `npm run type-check` - Run TypeScript type checking

### Tech Stack

- **React 19** - UI framework
- **TypeScript** - Type safety
- **Vite** - Build tool and dev server
- **Tailwind CSS** - Styling
- **Chart.js + react-chartjs-2** - Data visualization
- **React Hook Form + Zod** - Form handling and validation
- **React Query** - API state management
- **Axios** - HTTP client

### Project Structure

```
src/
├── components/          # Reusable UI components
│   ├── MortgageForm.tsx    # Main simulation form
│   ├── MortgageCharts.tsx  # Chart visualizations
│   └── Button.tsx          # Button component
├── pages/              # Page components
│   └── MortgageSimulation.tsx # Main simulation page
├── services/           # API services
│   └── mortgageApi.ts     # Mortgage API client
├── types/              # TypeScript type definitions
│   └── mortgage.ts        # API response types
├── utils/              # Utility functions
│   └── validation.ts      # Form validation schemas
└── main.tsx           # Application entry point
```

## 🌐 API Documentation

The application connects to the Mortgage Simulation API. For detailed API documentation, see the OpenAPI specification in `mortgagesim.json`.

Key features of the API:
- Comprehensive mortgage and savings simulation
- Fixed-rate period followed by variable rate
- Overpayment handling with savings deduction
- Savings growth with interest compounding
- Payment constraints and feasibility checks
- Net worth calculation including property value

## 🚀 Deployment

### Vercel (Recommended)

This project is optimized for Vercel deployment with the included `vercel.json` configuration.

#### Deploy to Vercel:

1. **Option 1: Connect GitHub Repository**
   - Push your code to GitHub
   - Go to [vercel.com](https://vercel.com)
   - Click "New Project" and import your GitHub repository
   - Vercel will automatically detect the Vite framework and configure the build

2. **Option 2: Deploy via CLI**
   ```bash
   # Install Vercel CLI
   npm i -g vercel
   
   # Deploy
   vercel
   
   # For production deployment
   vercel --prod
   ```

#### Environment Variables
If you need to override the API URL, you can set:
- `VITE_ENV=production` (automatically set by vercel.json)
- `VITE_API_URL=https://your-custom-api.com` (optional override)

### Other Platforms

For other deployment platforms, build the project and serve the `dist` folder:

```bash
npm run build
# Serve the 'dist' directory as a static site
```

## 🤝 Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch (`git checkout -b feature/amazing-feature`)
3. Commit your changes (`git commit -m 'Add some amazing feature'`)
4. Push to the branch (`git push origin feature/amazing-feature`)
5. Open a Pull Request

## 📝 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the LICENSE file for details.

---

**Built with ❤️ using React + TypeScript + Vite**
